.. _tutorials-how-to:

教程与操作指南的区别
==================================================

在 Diátaxis 中，教程和操作指南被严格区分。这种区分通常未被明确——事实上，软件产品文档中最常见的混淆正是 *教程* 与 *操作指南* 的混为一谈。

那么：教程和操作指南之间 *有* 什么区别？为什么这种区别很重要？又为何它们会被混淆？

这些都是很好的问题。让我们从最后一个问题开始。 *如果这种区分真的如此重要，为什么它不够明显呢？*


它们的共同点
----------------------------

在重要性层面上，教程和操作指南确实相似。它们都是实用型指南：包含供用户遵循的操作指引。它们的存在不是为了概念解析或传递信息，而是为了指导用户如何 *操作*，而非让用户 *了解或理解知识*。

两者都为读者列出了需要遵循的步骤，并且都承诺只要按照这些步骤操作，就能成功达成目标。除非用户实际操作设备并准备动手实践，否则这两种文档都难以发挥真正价值。它们都描述了有序的操作序列——只有按正确顺序执行动作，才能预期获得成功。

它们密切相关，就像许多亲密关系一样，乍看之下很容易被彼此混淆。


关键在于用户需要什么
------------------------------------------------

Diátaxis 坚持认为文档的关键在于用户需求，只有关注这一点，我们才能正确区分教程和操作指南。

用户有时处于 *学习* 状态，有时处于 *工作* 状态。文档必须同时满足这两种需求。

教程服务于处于学习阶段的用户，其核心使命是 *提供成功的学习体验*。操作指南服务于处于工作状态的用户，其核心使命是 *帮助用户完成任务*。这两种需求与使命截然不同，这也正是教程与操作指南的区别至关重要的原因：教程是 **以学习为导向** 的，而操作指南是 **以任务为导向** 的。

学习与工作
---------------------

我们可以通过一个实际案例来理解这一点。假设您从事医学行业：作为一名医生，需要掌握并应用临床实践技能。

作为医生，有时您会处于工作场景中 *运用技能*，有时则会处于学习场景中 *获取技能*（所有优秀的医生，即便是拥有长期执业经验者，都会持续学习以提升技能）。

学习
~~~~~~~~

在培训初期，您将学习如何缝合伤口。您会与同学在实验室里开始练习，操作台上摆放着小型皮肤垫（皮肤垫是由多层合成材料制成的模块，用于模拟表皮、脂肪和其他组织）。它们的硬度和质地与人体组织相似，在切割和缝合时表现也较为接近。您将获得所需的全套工具——手套、手术刀、缝针、缝线等——并逐步接受操作指导，了解每个步骤的执行方式及相应产生的效果。

接下来轮到您操作。您会拿起手术刀试探性地在皮肤垫表面划下，只在表层留下一道浅显的切口（或许助教会开玩笑问这块可怜的皮肤垫做了什么，竟要遭受如此粗糙的划痕）。您的邻座会对着自己的尝试露出沮丧神情——那道参差不齐的切口深度极不均匀，活像是刀械斗殴留下的痕迹。

经过数次尝试，在导师的反馈和修正指导下，您将完成一道相对整洁的切口——该切口主要穿过脂肪层且未伤及下方肌肉。成功啦！

..  image:: /images/suture.jpg
    :alt:
    :class: sidebar

但现在却要求您重新进行缝合！您将观看导师娴熟精准的演示——用几针整齐均匀的缝线完美闭合皮肤垫上的创口。而您却会手忙脚乱地摆弄缝线，工具拿错手又摆错方向，放置位置也不得当。缝针会从手中滑落，缝线会脱出针眼。还会因未能保持无菌操作而受到训斥。

最终您将真正开始缝合创口。您会在错误的部位刺穿皮肤，导致切口边缘撕裂。最终呈现的将是皮肤拉伸褶皱的丑陋外观，以及粗糙凌乱的缝线。即使对于您自认为操作正确的部分，助教们仍会提出严厉的批评。

但此刻， *您将完成首次创口缝合*。您会反复重温这个教程，曾经的笨拙操作将逐渐转化为自信的实践。通过 **亲手操作**，您将掌握基础技能，实现知行合一。

这是教程。它是在指导教师呵护下的 *学习过程*——这位导师始终以学员的利益为出发点进行教学。

工作
~~~~~~~~

现在，让我们思考一下医生的工作状态。作为一名执业医生，您已经能够完全胜任日常工作。您不仅掌握了缝合等临床技能，还精进了诸多其他专业技术，并且能够每日综合运用这些能力，将其应用于真实世界的医疗场景中。

以标准阑尾切除术为例。临床手册会列出手术室所需的设备与人员配置方案，详细说明团队成员定位方式以及手术工具、器械台和监护仪的布局规范。手册将逐步阐述团队需要遵循的操作流程，最终以正式交接给术后医疗团队作为流程终点。

..  image:: /images/operation.jpg
    :alt:
    :class: sidebar

手册将明确标示需要实施的切口位置，但具体操作方式取决于开展的是开放式手术还是腹腔镜手术、是否可依赖术前影像学资料等因素。其中会包含针对婴幼儿患者的特殊操作步骤或核查事项，以及术中中转开腹阑尾切除术时的应对方案。多数操作步骤将采用 *若满足特定条件，则执行相应操作* 的逻辑结构。

配备操作手册能确保所有步骤按正确顺序执行且无遗漏。作为团队，您们会逐项核对流程细节以提醒关键操作要点；有时甚至在执行过程中随时查阅手册。

即便是常规外科手术，临床操作手册也包含详尽的步骤清单与核查事项。这些手册本质上是操作指南，其目的并非教学——您已具备专业技能，也熟悉这些流程。它们的作用是在临床实践中为您提供安全指引以完成特定任务，实质上是 **服务于您工作** 的辅助工具。


理解差异
------------------------------

医学院课程与临床操作手册的区别，本质上就是教程与操作指南的区别。

..  cssclass:: lined

..  grid:: 1 2 2 2
    :margin: 0
    :padding: 0
    :gutter: 3

    ..  grid-item::

        教程的宗旨在于 **帮助学习者掌握基础能力**。

    ..  grid-item::

        操作指南的宗旨在于 **帮助已具备能力的用户正确完成特定任务**。

    ..  grid-item::

        教程 **提供学习体验**。人们通过实践性的亲身操作来学习技能。教程的关键在于学习者 *做了什么*，以及在操作过程中的体验。

    ..  grid-item::

        操作指南 **指导用户的工作**。

    ..  grid-item::

        教程遵循 **精心设计的路径**，从既定起点逐步推进至最终结论。在此过程中，学习者必须 *经历* 课程所要求的各项实践环节。

    ..  grid-item::

        操作指南旨在确保用户获得成功 *结果*，并引导其沿着最安全可靠的路径达成目标——但这条路径 **无法被完全掌控**：现实世界中随时可能出现干扰因素中断进程。

    ..  grid-item::

        教程的作用是 **让学习者熟悉** 工作内容：包括工具、语言、流程，以及所操作对象的响应行为方式等。其核心任务是引导学习者通过结构化、可重复的实践环节逐步掌握这些要素。

    ..  grid-item::

        操作指南能够且应当 **假定用户已熟悉** 所有这些内容。

    ..  grid-item::

        教程采用 **人为构建的场景**——这是一个预先尽可能设置完善的学习环境，旨在确保用户获得成功的学习体验。

    ..  grid-item::

        操作指南适用于 **现实场景**，需要应对各种突发状况。

    ..  grid-item::

        教程会 **消除意外状况**。

    ..  grid-item::

        操作指南必须 **为意外情况做好准备**，提醒用户可能出现的突发状况，并提供相应的处理指导。

    ..  grid-item::

        教程的路径遵循单一线性结构， **不提供选择或替代方案**。

    ..  grid-item::

        操作指南 **通常会采用分支路径**，描述达成同一目标的不同方法： *若满足此条件，则执行对应操作。当遇到...情况时，另一种替代方案是...*

    ..  grid-item::

        教程 **必须** 确保安全性。学习者不应遭受任何损害，必须始终能够返回起点重新开始。

    ..  grid-item::

        操作指南 **无法承诺绝对安全**；往往只有一次成功的机会。

    ..  grid-item::

        In a tutorial, **responsibility lies with the teacher**. If the learner gets into trouble, that's the teacher's problem
        to put right.

    ..  grid-item::

        In a how-to guide, **the user has responsibility** for getting themselves in and out of trouble.

    ..  grid-item::

        The learner **may not even have sufficient competence to ask the questions** that a tutorial answers.

    ..  grid-item::

        A how-to guide can assume that **the user is asking the right questions in the first
        place**.

    ..  grid-item::

        The tutorial is **explicit about basic things** - where to do things, where to put them, how to manipulate objects. It
        addresses the embodied experience - in our medical example, how hard to press, how to hold an implement; in a software
        tutorial, it could be where to type a command, or how long to wait for a response.

    ..  grid-item::

        A how-to guide relies on this as **implicit knowledge** - even bodily knowledge.

    ..  grid-item::

        A tutorial is **concrete and particular** in its approach. It refers to the specific, known, defined tools, materials,
        processes and conditions that we have carefully set before the learner.

    ..  grid-item::

        The how-to guide has to take a **general** approach: many of these things will be
        unknowable in advance, or different in each real-world case.

    ..  grid-item::

        The tutorial **teaches general skills and principles** that later could be applied to a
        multitude of cases.

    ..  grid-item::

        The user following a how-to guide is doing so in order to **complete a particular task**.

None of these distinctions are arbitrary. They all emerge from the distinction between **study** and **work**, which we
understand as a key distinction in making sense of what the user of documentation needs.



The basic and the advanced
--------------------------

A common but understandable conflation is to see the difference between tutorials and how-to guides as being the difference
between **the basic** and **the advanced**.

After all, tutorials are for learners, while how-to guides are for already-skilled practitioners. Tutorials must cover
the basics, while how-to guides have to deal with complexities that learners should not have to face.

However, there’s more to the story. Consider a clinical procedure manual: it could be a manual for a basic routine
procedure, of very low complexity. It could describe steps for mundane matters such as correct completion of paperwork
or disposal of particular materials. *How-to guides can, do and often should cover basic procedures.*

At the same time, even as a qualified doctor, you will find yourself back in training situations. Some of them may be
very advanced and specialised, requiring a high level of skill and expertise already.

Let’s say you’re an anaesthetist of many years’ experience, who attends a course: “Difficult neonatal intubations”. The
practical part of the course will be a learning experience: a lesson, safely in the hands of the instructors, that will
have you performing particular exercises to develop your skills - just as it was when years earlier, you were learning
to suture your first wound.

The complexity is wholly different though, and so is the baseline of skills required even to participate in the
learning experience. But, it’s of the same form, and serves the same kind of need, as that much earlier lesson.

It’s the same in software documentation: a tutorial can present something complex or advanced. And, a how-to guide can
cover something that’s basic or well-known. The difference between the two lies in the need they serve: **the user’s
study**, or **their work**.


Safety and success
--------------------------

Understanding these distinctions, and the reason for upholding them, is crucial to creating successful documentation. A
clinical manual that conflated education with practice, that tried to teach while at the same time providing a guide to
a real-world procedure would be a literally deadly document. It would kill people.

In disciplines such as software documentation, we get away with a great deal, because our conflations and mistakes
rarely kill anyone. However, we can cause a great deal of low-level inconvenience and unhappiness to our users, and we
add to it, every single time we publish a tutorial or how-to guide that doesn’t understand whether its purpose is to
help the user in their study - the acquisition of skills - or in their work - the application of skills.

What’s more, we hurt ourselves too. Users don’t have to use our product. If our documentation doesn’t bring them to
success - if it doesn’t meet the needs that they have at a particular stage in their cycle of interaction with our
product - they will find something else that does, if they can.

The conflation of tutorials and how-to guides is by no means the only one made between different kinds of
documentation, but it's one of the easiest to make. It's also a particularly harmful one, because it risks getting in
the way of those newcomers whom we hope to turn into committed users. For the sake of those users, and of our own
product, getting the distinction right is a key to success.


